Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


ScienceDirect


Climate change and water security: challenges for adaptive water management
Catherine Allan1, Jun Xia2 and Claudia Pahl-Wostl3
 


Water security is a key policy area for the Anthropocene; here we consider recent discourses of adaptive management in relation to water security. Definitions of water security emphasise the dual productive/destructive potentials of water, indicating its inherent economic, social and environmental complexity. Adaptive management has potential to address this social–ecological complexity because it supports a holistic approach. Although adaptive management is sometimes reduced to little more than conventional action under a new name, the potential for integrative, holistic, learning centred approaches remains within the concept of adaptation, and in the complementary conceptualisations of Integrated Water Resources Management, Social Learning and Resilience Thinking. Linking across policy fields (the water–food–energy– nexus) can only be achieved by these types of adaptive flexible and reflective approaches, and there is some, albeit tentative, moves in this direction in China’s National Water Policy, the European Flood Directive and Australia’s Murray–Darling Basin Plan. There is, however, much to do before water security, under an adaptive paradigm, becomes a concept and institutionalised practice that is continuously re-viewed and re-constructed to meet the needs of an ever changing world.

Addresses

1	Institute for Land, Water and Society, Charles Sturt University, Albury, Australia

2	The Research Institute for Water Security (RIWS), State Key Lab. of Water Resources & Hydropower Engineering Sciences, Wuhan University, 430072, China

3	Director Institute of Environmental Systems Research, University of Osnabru¨ck, Germany

Corresponding author: Allan, Catherine (callan@csu.edu.au)



Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632

This review comes from a themed issue on Aquatic and marine systems

Edited by Charles J Vo¨ro¨smarty, Claudia Pahl-Wostl and Anik Bhaduri

For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial


Received 3 May 2013; Accepted 23 September 2013

Available online 1st November 2013

1877-3435/$ – see front matter, # 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2013.09.004


Introduction

There is immense anthropogenic pressure on global freshwater [1]; human population growth and climate change are key elements of this pressure. Climate change

 



is likely to alter the availability and distribution of freshwater (and alter the impacts of water related disas-ters such as floods and droughts), while simultaneously increasing the demand for water from rivers [2] and impacting on groundwater availability [3]. ‘Water secur-ity’, always of human concern, has thus become a key policy area for the Anthropocene [4 ,5 ] Whether con-sidered initially from a biophysical or social perspective, ‘water security’ as a concept is complex, contested and dynamic, and requires complex and dynamic — that is, adaptive — thinking to be able to define and achieve it. Adaptive approaches to water management and govern-ance have been promoted for at least three decades as part of the shift from water government to water governance [6,7]. This paper considers recent additions to discourses of adaptive management as they relate to water security, drawing on examples from China, Europe and Australia.

Water security

Water security has been described as ‘adequate protec-tion from water-related disasters and diseases and access to sufficient quantity and quality of water, at affordable cost, to meet the basic food, energy and other needs essential for leading a healthy and productive life without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems’ [8]; and ‘. . . an acceptable level of water-related risks to humans and ecosystems, coupled with the availability of water of sufficient quantity and quality to support livelihoods, national security, human health, and ecosys-tem services’ [9,10]. Both definitions reflect the dual productive/destructive potentials of water, and point to the economic, social and environmental negotiations (sometimes ‘trade offs’) inherent in dealing with water generally [11 ] and water security in particular.

The current importance of understanding and aiming for water security is emphasised by the publication of more than 200 peer-reviewed papers on the topic since 2002 [11 ], but note that many of these publications are situated within the broader public discussion on how humans could or should manage natural resources. In the last quarter of the 20th century that public dis-course has questioned the desirability of relying solely on the scientific rationalist approach to managing and using natural resources. Scientific rationalism was initiated by the Enlightenment and necessarily com-plemented and supported command and control gov-ernment. Increasing recognition of biophysical and social uncertainties, evidence of managed ecosystem collapses, and policy complexities and ‘gridlocks’ (see,

 

www.sciencedirect.com	Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632
 
626	Aquatic and marine systems



Figure 1



Climate change	Globalisation	
		



Conventional,
Adaptive paradigm
Western paradigm
 



Known ways of acting:

command and control


Known ways of learning:

Research is separate

from doing


Known ways of

understanding:

Knowing through reduction


Known ways of working

together: fragmentation and

demarcation
 



Social and institutional

opportunities and

constraints

Water

security


Biophysical opportunities

and constraints
 




	New ways of		
	acting:		
	integrated and		
	informed		
New ways	New ways of		
	understanding:		
of working			
	knowing		
together:			
	through social		
integrated			
	learning	New ways of	
and			
		learning: is	
inclusive			
		part of doing	
			
		and is	
		inclusive	

 

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability

Conceptualisation of moving water security from being conventional to adaptive.

 


e.g. [12]) prompted the widespread reconsideration of management and governance that continues to this day [13]. The increased recognition of impacts from climate change has fuelled this ongoing discussion and has led to a broadly supported claim for a shift towards adaptive water management [6,7,14].

Adaptive water governance and management

‘Adaptive management’ developed as an alternative to conventional, reductionist natural resource management [15]. Although based in, and therefore reflecting the needs of, many natural resource sectors and political jurisdictions, adaptive management has a deceptively simple idea at its core — that of learning more about something from managing that something [16]. Providing an alternative to the conventional operational paradigm that separates knowledge creation (research) and knowl-edge application (management), adaptive management is considered suitable for addressing complexity and uncer-tainty because it is holistic. This holism encourages inclusion and integration of disciplinary knowledges, and the participation of a range of people and organis-ations with potentially different epistemological and ontological viewpoints. For example, under an adaptive, integrative paradigm the typically Western, reductionist ideas of managing water by sector and product [17] would

 



be explored and augmented by, say, reflecting on the Chinese philosophy of seeing water as the source of land and energy and life.

Within an adaptive paradigm the concept of ‘water secur-ity’ would be continuously re-viewed and re-constructed to meet the needs of a continuously changing world, rather than considered as a predetermined goal or end-point (see Figure 1).

Despite some superficial enthusiasm for change, and some minor blending of paradigms, the conversion from conventional to adaptive management, that is manage-ment that embraces uncertainty and complexity, has been slow and problematic in all sectors including water [18 ]. Institutional inertia, due to deeply entrenched norms, professional practices and behavioral routines, appears to prevent wide-spread acceptance of adaptive management [7,15]. There have been few fundamental structural changes within managing institutions, and without these changes the complexity and uncertainty that make adap-tive management necessary, also make it almost imposs-ible to achieve at scales other than the small and local [19,20]. Attempting adaptive management without appropriate institutional support can lead to disenchant-ment with its more radical aspects. Thus, although the

 

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632	www.sciencedirect.com
 
Climate change and water security: challenges for adaptive water management Allan, Xia and Pahl-Wostl	627
 




term adaptive management has been applied to many disparate activities [21] it is now most frequently associ-ated with field experimentation (e.g. [22,23]); indeed ‘adaptive management’ is sometimes indistinguishable from conventional management. To do justice to the global challenges to be addressed, including the aim of achieving water security, adaptive management must be framed much more broadly than as field experimentation. It needs to be reclaimed as a process for improving management policies and practices by systemic learning from the outcomes of implemented management strat-egies, within a reflective framework that recognises con-text, and expects and responds to changes in external factors. The sorts of holistic, integrative, learning centred approaches at the heart of adaptation are still to be found in the complementary conceptions of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) [7,24–26], social learn-ing [27 ,28–30,31 ] and resilience thinking [32 ]. In their various ways these approaches address issues of power and knowledge, and build on theories of participation, but each, even at local and regional scales, has multiple constraints on achieving adaptation. The challenges of pursuing water security via adaptive management are explored in some detail in the next section by considering selected current water policies from China, Europe and Australia. Figure 1 provides a framework for examining these cases: if adaptive management is being embraced and enacted within these policies there should be evi-dence of integrated and informed acting; integrating and inclusive means of working together, an emphasis on social learning, and mechanisms in place to enable learn-ing from implementing the policies.

China’s National Water Policy

China, as a large developing country, is facing a huge challenge in managing water resources to support its economic boom under the pressures of both climate change and human activity [33–35,36 ]. Based on the 2nd China Comprehensive Water Resource Assessment [37], the total amount of available water for China is about 814 billion cubic metres (BCM), accounting for 29% of the total water resources. The total available water in South China is about 560 BCM (1100 m3 per capita), while North China has 204.5 BCM of available water (only 359 m3 per capita). The population of China is estimated to reach 1.6 billion by 2030, and the total actual water use is estimated to be 710.1 BCM by then. Con-sidering social and economic growth and the impact of environmental change, available water resources will become more vulnerable, that is less secure, over time. Available water per capita in North China, particular in Hai River, Huang River (also called the Yellow River) and Huai River, will decrease from the current 359 m3 to 292 m3 by 2030, and water resources per capita in the whole country will be reduced from the current 628 m3 to 508 m3. Under conditions of climate change and increased human activity, the stresses and vulnerabilities

 





associated with water supply and water demand will increase significantly in China. These stresses will be exacerbated by predicted increases in the number and extreme of water related disasters. Adaptive water man-agement will therefore be a priority issue as China seeks to achieve sustainable water resources use in the next 20–

30	years [35,36 ,38]. Adaptation in this context operates at different time scales — from several years, to decades and multiple decades — and is implemented by various sec-tors, including public, private, communities and individ-uals. Each of these has their own objectives to cope with real or perceived climate related stresses or risks, and each will use different measures to achieve them. To maintain sustainable water use while coping with the anticipated impact of climate change, the Chinese Government has produced a series of national water strategy actions. One of the priority actions is the National Water Policy; ‘implementing a strict-as-possible water resources man-agement’ through ‘three red line controls’ for the next 20–

30	years [39]. In brief this involves: first, establishing a total volume control system on water consumption for development and use of water resources, (2) establishing a water use efficiency control system and creating a ‘red line for water efficiency control’, and (3) establishing pollution receiving restriction systems in water function areas. Successful implementation of the plan will support and guarantee the development of economic and ecosys-tem rehabilitation, contribute the economic security of China’s society, and promote modernisation of the country.


Applying the framework from Figure 1 highlights the influence of the conventional paradigm in China’s water policy, but the necessity to adapt to climate change impacts is also strong. To operate within the adaptive paradigm stakeholders must have the capacity to act. Adaptive water management in China involves several actions from central government, local government, river basin commissions, stakeholders and public. One of them is adaptive capacity building through integrating ‘top down’ and ‘bottom up’ approaches. The three red line controls promote infrastructure building, water saving policies and good water governance that also aim to enhance adaptive capacity. Another adaptive action involves managing the multiple risks and uncertainties related to emission scenarios, climate-hydrologic models and downscaling/bias correction, as well as managing uncertainties arising from increased extreme water events such as flooding. The management of multiple risks and uncertainties such as these prioritise climate risk man-agement, and ‘no regrets’, robust, and flexible adaptation options. It is to be noted that the benefits and costs of adaptation actions such as these need to be taken into account. This includes the social, environmental and economic costs and benefits, and both the monetary and non-monetary implication of actions. Recent studies suggest that the most urgent actions are to identify key

 

www.sciencedirect.com	Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632
 
628	Aquatic and marine systems
 




vulnerabilities and risks, and also to build up internal linkages of water resources vulnerability and adaptation in relation to China’s ‘Three Red Line Control’ policy and countermeasures [40]. Social learning and governance reframing may be the means to achieve this; despite a historical context of top-down hierarchical water man-agement, social learning as a water governance approach has been demonstrated as possible within China [41].

Europe’s Water Framework Directive

Europe has encountered a major change in water policy. The European Water Framework Directive (WFD), which came into force in 2000, promotes an integrated approach to achieving ‘good status’ for all European waters (surface waters and groundwater). The WFD leaves considerable freedom to member states and fore-sees several iterative cycles for the implementation. While these mechanisms should encourage learning from the policy, other aspects of the adaptive paradigm from Figure 1 are less apparent. Despite the opportunities offered by the WFD, implementation practice has not adopted a more systemic way for dealing with uncertain-ties and has not taken into account either resilience or complexity [42 ,43]. As with China’s water policy, climate change may be a driver for change to more adaptive approaches. The guidance document for WFD imple-mentation on climate change that was written in a more advanced state of the implementation process is strongly promoting adaptive management and robust decision making under uncertainty [44]. Most likely its impact will only become visible in the second implementation cycle starting 2015.


Moving towards adaptive management is more advanced in the realm of flood management. European and related national flood policies are moving away from reducing the probability of floods with structural measures towards reducing vulnerability and building adaptive capacity. The European Flood Directive (FD), which entered into force in November 2007, requires EU Member States to assess if water courses and coast lines are at risk from flooding, to map flood risk, and to take adequate and coordinated measures to reduce potential impacts. The FD also reinforces the rights of the public to access this information and to participate in the planning process. A country much advanced in this respect is the Netherlands. In this country, that owes its existence to the success of drainage of the landscape and converting sea to inhabitable terrain, technical control of water flows has been the dominant paradigm for centuries. During recent years, a more radical rethinking has taken place, mainly triggered by prospects of climate change. New policies embrace integrated approaches combining spatial planning and flood management and are moving towards an integrated landscape management approach. Time and space are available within the program for innovative structural and non-structural measures, and stakeholder

 





participation. Nevertheless, the technocratic approach of flood management still surfaced to impede timely public involvement which proved to be a major problem during planning of so-called calamity polders. Severe local pro-tests led to an abandonment of initial plans to prepare for flooding areas of low economic value to prevent flooding of major assets in the rich delta-regions [45]. There was poor appreciation that social justice issues cannot be dealt with in a technocratic, expert mode. Similar experiences were reported from the UK where the implementation of a broader range of flood adaptation measures were ham-pered by institutional cultures formed when structural, engineered approaches were the norm [46].

Australia’s National Water Initiative and the Murray– Darling Basin

Water policy in Australia has been undergoing rapid change since 1994. The National Water Initiative (NWI) of 2004 and the Water Act of 2007 reflect and solidify a fundamental shift in how Australians under-stand and manage water [47], effectively ending the era of expansion and acknowledging over allocation and com-petition among water users, including the ‘environment’ [48]. Against this backdrop of institutional change the Murray–Darling Basin (MDB) — Australia’s ancient and climatically fickle ‘food bowl’ — faces a bleak future under climate change projections of increases in tempera-tures and evaporation, and reductions in rainfall and runoff to the rivers and wetlands [49]. The biophysical nature of the Basin requires innovation as represented in the adaptive paradigm of Figure 1; based on new knowl-edge and new ways of thinking about knowledge [50]. However, the history of water policy in the MDB raises questions about the adequacy of proposed responses and processes, especially as they relate to situated and con-textualized learning [51]. Adaptive management is included as a foundation of the NWI [52], and of the Murray–Darling Basin Plan, the most recent strategy for managing water in the MDB [53]. Although rarely phrased as such, the Basin Plan is about water security in the sense described earlier as the ‘availability of water of sufficient quantity and quality to support livelihoods. . .and ecosystem services’. The intent to be adaptive is flagged: for example, the Basin Plan focuses on property rights and Sustainable Diversion Limits (SDLs), but the SDLs are not intended to be fixed quantities. Adaptive manage-ment is proposed to enable the level of the SDLs to reflect new knowledge and changing context over time [54]. How this can be achieved within existing institu-tional arrangements, however, is as yet unclear. It is currently possible to find examples of adaptive manage-ment in the Murray–Darling Basin, but in the form of river or catchment scale experiments that operate within, and therefore only slightly challenge, existing conven-tional institutional frameworks and understandings (e.g. [55]). It is less easy to find evidence of the institutional transformations needed to support broader, systemic and

 

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632	www.sciencedirect.com
 
Climate change and water security: challenges for adaptive water management Allan, Xia and Pahl-Wostl	629
 




adaptive water management. The policy space of the MDB is crowded, complex and destructively competitive [56 ]. Processes to encourage and support examination of this complexity and its consequences for learning and adaptation are proposed (e.g. [57]), but there is much room for developing ways to enhance reflection both on and in practice (i.e. aspects of social learning), and to ultimately support the adaptive management that is required.


Lessons from these three cases

The brief exploration of these three cases highlights the widespread desire to manage water in more adaptive ways than in the past, but also the tenacity of the conventional paradigm. One challenge shared among the case policies is to find the most appropriate balance between government initiated and led (so called top down) and community, citizen (bottom up) approaches for policy development and implementation. Perhaps even more challenging is balan-cing various technical and socially determined framings of water, highlighting the contested role of learning and knowledge in water policy development and implementa-tion. These balancing acts are clearly made more difficult by the reluctance of individuals and their governments to change institutional arrangements and habits, at least partly because of the investment of money and other resources in them. Even when policy is said to promote adaptive management, as in these three cases, known ways of acting, learning, understanding and working together dominate, while the adaptive paradigm claims only isolated changes to practice, such as flexible diversion limits in Australia, or integrated spatial planning and flood man-agement in the Netherlands, or aspects of capacity building in China. The necessity to respond to the impacts of climate change is likely to overcome the reluctance to fully embrace the adaptive paradigm, but currently most moves towards adaptive, integrative water policy to achieve water security are slow and contested, and require concerted and sustained effort.

Global approaches for water security

A recent addition to the discourse of water security is that of the ‘global’ imperative (e.g. [58–60,61 ]). Currently, both the International Water Resources Association (IWRA) and the World Water Congress (WWC) are promoting a water strategy on global and regional water security that encourages adaptive approaches and Inte-grated Water Resources Management.

The issues identified above at regional, catchment and country scales will necessarily be present at the global scale — but global consideration of water security suggests new types of issues will need to be addressed as well. Thinking from a global perspective highlights that water security is not only about ensuring a specific amount of water to meet a specific need, but that it is also a systemic issue with global dimensions; ‘scaling up’ is not

 





only bigger, but potentially different. To address these additional issues a global perspective on water security needs both heightened scientific rigour and comprehen-sive participation in planning for the future. A global perspective also highlights the desirability of ensuring policy and operational linkages between water security and sustainable development. Global water security is a concept that thus encourages consideration of a broad social-ecological system that includes aspects of security for water, food, energy, human health, and eco-environ-mental function.

How to encourage the desire and capacity for adaptive approaches within and across jurisdictions remains a work in progress. Understandings of the requirements for achieving water security will vary between different regions and different countries, especially between ‘ma-ture’ and developing water management regimes. Any global water security framework must cater for different regions having different water security issues; for example regional flood control, reducing drought disaster, water pollution control, and ecosystem conservation. Although there are differing demands for/understandings of water security in different regions, different countries, and at different levels of ‘development’, regional water security strategies could be developed under the frame-work of global water security. This global framework could emphasise the most important water security issues in each region (such as regional flood control, reducing drought disaster, water pollution control, and eco-system conservation by linkage of hydrological cycle), while maintaining the goal of global water security. Of import-ance is to recognise the underlying systemic nature of water security, so that the impacts or consequences of water security activities are considered in the light of human welfare and environmental responsibility (i.e. sustainable development).

A global perspective increases the complexity of ‘water security’ many times over. Can adaptive management be a guiding principle here, as well as for more local situ-ations? Systemic, holistic learning and adaptive manage-ment have the potential to enable action despite the complexity of global water management, but, judging from experience at local scales, a sustained and well supported effort would be required to address the many constraints on it. Not least is the expectation of adaptive management as another panacea, of which several have already been (unsuccessfully) applied ignoring largely the importance of context [62,63]. Also, scale issues will impact on the efficacy and efficiency of adaptive, inte-grative approaches. Social learning may become more difficult to achieve as the social-ecological system in consideration expands to global scale. In such a situation how are evidence and scientific rigour understood and used with vastly multiple perspectives? What institu-tional arrangements can be developed to promote

 

www.sciencedirect.com	Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632
 
630	Aquatic and marine systems




discussion about what science, or knowledge, or even wisdom, mean? And how is integrity maintained with increased jurisdictional and political complexity?

The future of adaptive management for water security?

In this paper we suggest that linking across policy fields (the water-food-energy-nexus) can be achieved by an adap-tive — that is an integrating and reflective — approach. Adaptive management, part of the suite of approaches that includes Integrated Water Resources Management and Social Learning, has the potential to be a guiding principle that can be tailored to context and scale. However, we also demonstrate that moving from the conventional manage-ment paradigm to a paradigm of adaptive management is constrained by many challenges at the regional and country scale, challenges that are likely to increase in number and complexity at a global scale. A commitment to adaptive water policy and implementation will require continual reflection on the idea of what water security is and how it can be achieved in varying contexts. Processes will need to be developed to enhance coordination of information and knowledge creation. A range of possibilities were presented at the 2013 Bonn conference on Water in the Anthropocene, including a proposed’ Global Scenario net-work and a framework for a global water security strategy, encompassing knowledge management and global water security assessment systems. These and other proposals from the conference are complemented by an increasing selection of global information sharing platforms, such as the Future Earth Initiative of the International Council for Science. Processes for learning together, including linking across policy fields, also exist or are being developed (e.g. [25,30,64 ,65,31]). These and other experiments in the practice of governance and management must be con-sidered, and the rate of research (traditional and action) into such processes increased, to enable the continuous re-viewing and re-constructing of the concept of water security needed to meet the needs of an ever changing world.


References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:

of special interest
of outstanding interest

1.	Rockstro¨m J, Steffen W, Noone K, Persson A˚, Chapin SF, Lambin EF, Lenton TM, Scheffe M, Folke C, Schellnhuber HJ et al.: A safe operating space for humanity. Nature 2009:46.

2.	Tir J, Stinnett DM: Weathering climate change: can institutions mitigate international water conflict? J Peace Res 2012, 49:211-225.

3.	Mitchell M, Curtis A, Sharp E, Mendham E: Directions for social research to underpin improved groundwater management. J Hydrol 2012, 448–449:223-231.

4.	Vo¨ro¨smarty CJ, McIntyre P, Gessner MO, Dudgeon D,

Prusevich A, Green P, Glidden S, Bunn SE, Sullivan CA, Liermann CR: Global threats to human water security and river biodiversity. Nature 2010, 467:555-561.

Considers both human and biodiversity perspectives on water security using a spatial framework.
 





5.	Cook C, Bakker K: Water security: debating an emerging
paradigm. Glob Environ Change 2012, 22:94-102.

Reviews varying conceptualisations of water security, drawing on narra-tives from a variety of academic disciplines.

6.	Pahl-Wostl C: Transitions towards adaptive management of water facing climate and global change. Water Resour Manage 2007, 21:49-62.

7.	Pahl-Wostl C, Jeffrey P, Isendahl N, Brugnach M: Maturing the

new water management paradigm: progressing from aspiration to practice. Water Resour Manage 2011, 25:837-856.

8.	Pachova NI, Nakayama M, Jansky L: International Water Security

Domestic Threats and Opportunities. Tokyo, New York: United Nations University Press; 2008, .

9.	Cook BR, Spray CJ: Ecosystem services and integrated water

resource management: different paths to the same end? J Environ Manage 2012, 109:93-100.

10.	Grey D, Sadoff CW: Sink or Swim? Water security for growth and development. Water Policy 2007, 9:545-571.

11.	Bakker K: Water security: research challenges and
opportunities. Science 2012, 337:914-915.

Provides succinct and accessible discussions on conceptualizations of water security, and suggests future research needs in this area.

12.	Holling CS, Gunderson LH, Folke C, Goran Maler K: Final Report of the Project Resilienceof Ecosystems. Economic Systems and Institutions; 2000.

13.	Lockwood M, Davidson J, Curtis A, Stratford E, Griffith R: Governance principles for natural resource management. Soc Nat Resour 2010, 23:986-1001.

14.	De Stefano L: International initiatives for water policy

assessment: a review. Water Resour Manage 2010, 24:2449-2466.

15.	Allan C, Curtis A: Nipped in the Bud: why regional scale adaptive management is not blooming. Environ Manage 2005, 36:414-425.

16.	Stankey G, Allan C: Introduction. In Adaptive Environmental Management: A Practitioner’s Guide. Edited by Allan C, Stankey G. Springer; 2009:3-8.

17.	Falkenmark M: The greatest water problem: the inability to link environmental security, water security and food security. Int J Water Resour Dev 2001, 17:539-554.

18.	Allen CR, Gunderson LH: Pathology and failure in the design and implementation of adaptive management. J Environ

Manage 2011, 92:1379-1384.

Considers nine institutional and cultural ‘pathologies’ that appear to impede moving from conventional to adaptive management.

19.	Allan C: Can adaptive management help us embrace the

Murray–Darling Basin’s wicked problems? In Adaptive and Integrated Water Management: Coping with Complexity and Uncertainty. Edited by Pahl-Wostl C, Kabat P, Moltgen J. Springer; 2008:61-73.

20.	Allan C: Rethinking the ‘Project’: bridging the polarized discourses in IWRM. J Environ Policy Plann 2012, 14:231-241.

21.	Allen CR, Fontaine JJ, Pope KL, Garmestani AS: Adaptive management for a turbulent future. J Environ Manage 2011, 92:1339-1345.

22.	Camacho AE, Susskind L, Schenk T: Collaborative planning and

adaptive management in Glen Canyon: a cautionary tale. Columbia J Environ Law 2010:35.

23.	Smith CB: Adaptive management on the central Platte River — science, engineering, and decision analysis to assist in the recovery of four species. J Environ Manage 2011, 92:1414-1419.

24.	Saravanan VS, McDonald GT, Mollinga PP: Critical review of integrated water resources management. Nat Resour Forum 2009, 33:76-86.

25.	Colvin J, Ballim F, Chimbuya S, Everard M, Goss J, Klarenberg G, Ndlovu S, Ncala D, Weston D: Building capacity for co-operative governance as a basis for Integrated Water Resources


 

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632	www.sciencedirect.com
 
Climate change and water security: challenges for adaptive water management Allan, Xia and Pahl-Wostl	631
 



Managing in the Inkomati and Mvoti Catchments South Africa.
Water SA 2008, 34.

26.	Grigg NS: Integrated water resources management: balancing views and improving practice. Water Int 2008, 33:279-292.

27.	Blackmore C, Ison RL, Jiggins J: Social learning: an alternative policy instrument for managing in the context of Europe’s

water. Environ Sci Policy 2007, 10:493-498.

28.	Ison R, Blackmore C, Iaquinto BL: Towards systemic and

adaptive governance: exploring the revealing and concealing aspects of contemporary social-learning metaphors. Ecol Econ 2013, 87:34-42.

29.	Mostert E, Craps M, Pahl-Wostl C: Social learning: the key to integrated water resources management? Water Int 2008, 33:293-304.

30.	Pahl-Wostl C, Nilsson C, Gupta J, Tockner K: Societal learning needed to face the water challenge. AMBIO — J Human Environ 2011, 40:549-553.

31.	Ison R, Collins K, Colvin J, Jiggins J, Roggero P, Seddaiu G,

Steyaert P, Toderi M, Zanolla C: Sustainable catchment managing in a climate changing world: new integrative modalities for connecting policy makers, scientists and other stakeholders. Water Resour Manage 2011, 25:3977-3992.

Argues that climate change adapting is best understood as a co-evolu-tionary dynamic between the human and biophysical worlds. The authors present eight modalities for brokering knowledge, with the ultimate aim of making climate change adaptation a reality.

32.	Folke C, Carpenter S, Walker B, Scheffer M, Chapin T,

Rockstro¨m J: Resilience thinking: integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecol Soc 2010, 15.

Discusses the relationship between resilience and adaptability, and high-lights the importance of fostering social ecological system resilience at small scales.

33.	Xia J, Zhang Y-Y, Zhan C, Ye AZ: Water quality management in

china: the case of the huai river basin. Int J Water Resour Dev 2011, 27:167-180.

34.	Xia J, Yongyong Z: Water security in north China and countermeasure to climate change and human activity. Phys Chem Earth Pt A/B/C 2008, 33:359-363.

35.	Xia J: Guest editor’s introduction. Water Int 2012, 37:509-511.

36.	Cheng H, Hu Y: Improving China’s water resources

management for better adaptation to climate change. Clim Change 2012, 112:253-282.

Provides historical context for current water management challenges in China.

37.	Ministry of Water Resources: Water Resource Assessment for

China. Beijing, China: Water and Power Press; 2010, :. (in Chinese).

38.	Xia J: Screening for climate change adaptation: impact and challenges for China. Int J Hydropower Dams 2010, 17:78-81.

39.	China State Council: State Council Opinion regarding the most strict water resource management system. 2012 http:// www.gov.cn/zwgk/2012-02/16/content_2067664.htm. (accessed 25 July 2012).

40.	Xia J, Qiu B, Li Y: Water resources vulnerability and adaptive management in the Huang, Huai and Hai river basins of China. Water Int 2012, 37:523-536.

41.	Wei Y, Ison R, Colvin J, Collins K: Reframing water governance: a multi-perspective study of an over-engineered catchment in China. J Environ Plann Manage 2011, 55:297-318 http:// dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2011.597589.

42.	Sigel K, Klauer B, Pahl-Wostl C: Conceptualising uncertainty in environmental decision-making: the example of the EU water

framework directive. Ecol Econ 2010, 69:502-510.
Provides a conceptual framework for dealing with uncertainty within the
EU WFD.

43.	Olsson P, Galaz V: Transitions to adaptive approaches to water

management and governance in Sweden. In Water Policy Entrepreneurs: A Research Companion to Water Transitions

 




Around the Globe. Edited by Huitema D, Meijerink S. Edwar Elgar; 2009:304-324.

44.	European Commission: Common implementation strategy for the Water Framework Directive. Guidance document no. 24 river basin management in a changing climate. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities; 2009, .

45.	Roth DIK, Warner J: Flood risk, uncertainty and changing river

protection policy in the Netherlands: the case of ‘calamity polders’. Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geografie 2007, 98:519-525.

46.	Harries T, Penning-Rowsell E: Victim pressure, institutional

inertia and climate change adaptation: the case of flood risk. Glob Environ Change 2011, 21:188-197.

47.	Dovers S, Hussey K: Managing Water for Australia: The Social and

Institutional Challenges. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing; 2007, .

48.	Connell D: Water reform and the federal system in the Murray– Darling Basin. Water Resour Manage 2011, 25:3993-4003.

49.	Nielsen D, Brock M: Modified water regime and salinity as a

consequence of climate change: prospects for wetlands of Southern Australia. Clim Change 2009, 95:523-533.

50.	Williams J: Understanding the basin its dynamics. In Basin Futures. Edited by Connell D, Grafton Q. Canberra: ANU e Press; 2011.

51.	Quiggin J: Managing the Murray–Darling Basin: some implications for climate change policy. Econ Papers 2008, 27:160-166.

52.	National Water Commission: The Raising National Water Standards Program. Australian Government; 2005.

53.	Murray–Darling Basin Authority: Basin, Plan. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia (Murray–Darling Basin Authority); 2012, .

54.	Crase L: The Murray–Darling basin plan: an adaptive response

to ongoing challenges. Econ Papers: J Appl Econ Policy 2012, 31:318-326.

55.	Watts RJ, Ryder DS, Allan C, Commens S: Using river-scale experiments to inform the adaptive management process for variable flow releases from large dams. Mar Freshw Res 2010, 61:786-797.

56.	Pittock J, Connell D: Australia demonstrates the planet’s future: water and climate in the Murray–Darling Basin. Int J Water

Resour Dev 2010, 26:561-578.

Considers the reality of social contestation as Australia’s water policy attempts to address climate change impacts.

57.	Wallis PJ, Ison RL: Appreciating institutional complexity in

water governance dynamics: a case from the Murray–Darling Basin, Australia. Water Resour Manage 2011:1-17.

58.	Gawel E, Bernsen K: Globalization of water: the case for global water governance? Nat Cult 2011, 6:205-217.

59.	Alcamo J, Grassl H, Hoff H, Kabat P, Lansigan F, Lawford R, Lettenmaier D, Le´veˆque C, Meybeck M, Naiman R et al.: GWSP: The Global Water System Project — Science Framework and Implementation Activities. 2005.

60.	Gupta J, Akhmouch A, Cosgrove W, Hurwitz Z, Maestu J, U¨nver O: Policymakers’ reflections on water governance issues. Ecol Soc 2013:18.

61.	Bogardi JJ, Dudgeon D, Lawford R, Flinkerbusch E, Meyn A, Pahl-Wostl C, Vielhauer K, Vo¨ro¨smarty C: Water security for a planet

under pressure: interconnected challenges of a changing world call for sustainable solutions. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2012, 4:35-43.

The opportunities, for both technical interventions and governance fra-meworks, provided by considering a ‘global water system’ are discussed.

62.	Pahl-Wostl C, Lebel L, Knieper C, Nikitina E: From applying

panaceas to mastering complexity: toward adaptive water governance in river basins. Environ Sci Policy 2012, 23:24-34.

 

www.sciencedirect.com	Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632
 
632	Aquatic and marine systems



63.	Ingram H: Beyond universal remedies for good water
governance: a political and contextual approach. Sixth Biennial
Rosenberg Water Policy Forum on ‘Water For Food: Quantity and
Quality in a Changing World’; Zaragoza, Spain: 2008.

64.	Steyaert P, Jiggins J: Governance of complex environmental situations through social learning: a synthesis of SLIM’s

lessons for research, policy and practice. Environ Sci Policy 2007, 10:575-586.
 





Considers the relationship between knowledge, research, and policy and encourages water managers to be open to social learning processes.

65.	Collins K, Blackmore C, Morris D, Watson D: A systemic approach to managing multiple perspectives and stakeholding in water catchments: some findings from three UK case studies. Environ Sci Policy 2007, 10:564-574.


 



























































Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2013, 5:625–632	www.sciencedirect.com
